[Music]
in the fall of 1924
curtis welsh the only doctor in the port
town of gnome in alaska
raised the alarm there was too little of
the cure for diphtheria
a highly dangerous and easy to spread
disease that was quite common for the
time
dr welsh ordered an additional badge and
was hoping to receive it before winter
because otherwise the town would be
locked out by ice for eight months
but the ship with the cure didn't make
it in time and the town had no
choice but to wait until spring there
were no signs of an outbreak in gnome
but dr welsh was still beside himself
for some reason
in december he took in several children
with a sore throat
and although he ruled out diphtheria his
suspicions grew with every passing day
until finally in january 1925
they turned out to be correct he
officially diagnosed the first case of
the disease gnome was home to about two
thousand people
but ten thousand more lived in the
surrounding area all at risk of
contracting the illness
dr welsh made sure the situation reached
the ears of everyone in power to help
and an emergency committee was formed
while the town was put on quarantine
over a million units of the cure enough
to stop the spread
were found across the country and
shipped to alaska but the real challenge
was to get them to gnome itself the port
was still frozen solid
the railroad ended in nina 674 miles
away
and airplanes of the time were incapable
of flying
in the extreme temperatures of the
sub-arctic thus
after a brief discussion the only
solution was agreed upon
dog sleds sled dogs and their drivers
called mushers were the pride of alaska
and also the main carriers of the mayo
since there wasn't any transport able to
navigate the area
for the salvation race of 1925
only the top mushers were chosen dr
wells calculated that the serum could
survive no more than six days
in the harsh conditions on the trail
after which it needed to thaw
so the dogs had to be as fast as
possible the best among the mushers was
leonard sappala with his lead dog
a siberian husky named togo they were
based in gnome
and became a local legend for being the
fastest and hardiest team ever
the cure was to be delivered by train to
ninana
and taken from there by dogs in a
two-team relay
one team loaded with a precious cargo
would start in inanna
while the other would run to meet them
from gnome the meeting point was almost
halfway
in the town of nulato zapalo was chosen
to make over 400 miles from gnome and
back
but after he set off it was decided to
add more teams into the relay
to make it faster breaking the race into
30 mile legs give or take
he didn't know about that which almost
ended in a catastrophe for gnome
sopala and his sled ran as fast as they
could
cutting the distance across norton sound
an inlet of the bering sea
which was hazardous because of the
shifting eyes he was the only musher who
dared this shortcut
and it saved a full day of travel the
team successfully crossed the
treacherous area
although the weather was terrifying as
if to conspire against the humans
the winter of 1925 was the coldest in 20
years with
gales dropping the temperature as low as
minus 100 degrees at times
when they were 170 miles into the race
sopala
sure he still had almost 50 miles ahead
of him suddenly saw another musher
having trouble with his dogs
he raced past not wanting to slow down
when he heard the man calling out to him
through the wind and snow
the serum the serum i have it here
it turned out that the mushers going
from the other side were indeed faster
the man got the cure more than a full
day ahead of the original schedule
and it was a pure chance that he saw
sappala like he did
if they hadn't met the medicine could
have easily been lost
sealing gnome's fate zapala took the
cargo from the other man
and turned around night was falling he
had to make his way back
in what would be the most perilous part
of the journey
he gave his dogs and himself a short
rest and made up his mind
he would dare the crossing of norton
sound again
the winds grew even stronger and a
full-blown blizzard started when sappala
was halfway through the sound
he was afraid they'd lose their way and
get stranded on an ice drift
but togo his trusty lead dog had a
perfect sense of smell
and led the team as surely as ever and
then
sapala heard an ominous creep the worst
had happened
the ice was moving underneath them if
the ice flow started
the whole team could be stranded in the
open sea
he didn't know how much they had to go
in the snowstorm
with almost zero visibility but he
trusted his dogs
and especially togo and so they pressed
on
the creaking got worse and sopalo was so
intent on getting out of it alive
that he was almost taken by surprise
when the snow veil suddenly lifted
and he saw the shore they made it
still it was a long way before the end
of the race they reached a roadhouse on
the other side of norton sound and took
some rest
only to continue going four short hours
later
togo persevering as ever led his team
onward and
up toward mount little mckinley a climb
of eight miles in total
finally the sled arrived at the town of
golovin
where they were met by the next musher
on the trail and transferred the cargo
all in all the team covered over 260
miles in five days
beating every other sled by a wide
margin
justice demanded that togo have all the
glory for his historic efforts
but the reality was different the last
leg of a little over 50 miles
was covered by gunnar carson and his
lead dog
balto cousin was to only travel half
that distance in fact
but he arrived to the relay point too
early and found that his change was
asleep
not to lose time he decided to press on
and deliver the medicine himself
balto seemingly approved he was still
full of strength
even after enduring a long trip in the
blizzard and chilling cold
so it happened that on february 2nd at 5
30 a.m the cure arrived to gnome and was
ready to use within several hours
the citizens were overjoyed and greeted
cousin and balto with cheers
soon after their fame outgrew the town
and even alaska
making the team celebrities across the
whole country
even though every member of the relay
received awards and commendations from
the president
balto's fame went much further he
received a symbolic bone-shaped key to
the city of los angeles
a statue in new york and even starred in
a movie
and 70 years later a cartoon based on
the events was made by disney
togo received his share of glory too but
his role in what became known
as the great suram run wasn't as widely
acknowledged
sappala and his lead dog traveled across
many of the states the following year
gathering cheering crowds everywhere
finally they decided to stay in a town
of poland
spring maine where sappala opened a
kennel of siberian huskies
there togo lived in love and respect
until the end of his life in 1929
three years later leonard zappala sold
his kennels and returned to alaska
to participate in the winter olympics as
a sled dog driver
his team won silver of the events of the
great serum rod
he only said one thing he was glad that
everything happened as it did
but the only thing that upset him was
that togo wasn't recognized as the true
hero of that race
surely he would have been happy to know
that with time
the brave dog finally received the
acclaim he deserved like no
other and that's how it was